# Memory and Pointers

## Computer memory

- A computer is a real, physical machine made up of many different components. Collectively, we refer to these components as the computer's **hardware**.

- When we write computer programs( which we refer to as **software**), we are able to send specific instructions to the computer's hardware to do calculations, store information, etc.
- The programs we write all make use of a specific component of the computer's hardware called **Random Acceess Memory(RAM)**.
  - This is what we usually refer to when we talk about "computer memory".
  - C++ gives us a variety of fundamental ways to access computer hardware from our code.

### The Hexadecimal Number System

- In computer systems, there a number of factors that make it more convenient to express numbers using the **hexadecimal (base-16) number system**.
  - Each place value represents a factor of 16 (160, 161, 162, etc.) and there are 16 "digits."
  - Since there are only 10 numerical digits (0-9), this system also uses the letters a to f as "digits."
  - **0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 a(10) b(11) c(12) d(13) e(14) f(15)**
- The prefix **0x** is used to communicate that a number is being expressed in hexadecimal.

## Pointers

- A pointer is a new data type that allows us to work directly with computer memory addresses.
- Just like all other data types, pointers take up space in memory and store specific values.
- **A pointer always stores a memory address**, telling us where in the computer's memory to look for a certain value.
- In doing this, they quite literally "point" to another location on your computer.

## Pointer Syntax

- To declare a pointer of a particular type, use the **(asterisk)** symbol:

  `````c++
  string* petPtr;// declare a pointer to a string
  int* agePtr;// declare a pointer to an int
  char* letterPtr;// declare a pointer to a char
  `````

- When initializing a pointer, we can use the **& (ampersand)** operator to get the address of the variable that we want to point to

  ```c++
  string pet = "cat";
  string* petPointer = &pet;
  ```

- Pointers can be used to store the value generated by the **new** keyword( which is just a memory address).

  - We're familiar with this in the context of arrays:

    ````c++
    int* elements = new int[5];
    ````

  - But C++ also allows us to dynamically allocate space for just a single variable:

    ```c++
    int* singleNumPointer = new int;
    ```

- To read or modify the variable that a pointer points to, we use the *** (asterisk)**

  operator to **dereference the pointer**. Dereferencing a pointer involves following the arrow to the memory location at the end of the arrow and then reading or modifying the value stored there.

  ```c++
  string* petPtr;
  string pet = "cat";
  petPtr = &pet;
  cout << *petPtr << endl;
  *petPtr = "dog";
  ```

  